---
layout:     post
title:      JOnsen 2018
date:       2018-05-22 10:00:00
summary:    The most relaxed Java (un)conference
tags:
- conference
- java
- unconference
- draft
---

[JOnsen](http://jonsen.jp) is an unconference hosted in a Japanese onsen. It was hosted over three days of May 2018 in Hakone, Japan. It was an unconference attended by around 30 members of the Japanese and international Java community. Here's what I thought of it.

# An Unconference...

Although I had heard the term before, this was my first time at an "unconference" so I wasn't quite sure what to expect. So, an [unconference](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unconference) is a kind of conference with a timetable where all the slots start out empty and participants choose their own agenda. At JOnsen sessions lasted for around 50 minutes each, and there were two sessions happening at a time.

So how did we decide what to talk about? At the start of the event, and at the start of each subsequent day, and at any other random time that enough people were present, participants gathered to suggest session topics. There was no requirement that a person be an expert in the topic they suggested, they might simply want to learn more about something or have a group discussion to find out others' opinions. The nominal theme of JOnsen is Java, and there were a few Java sessions, but other technical sessions were proposed and we had many non-technical suggestions too.

The topics were written onto post-its and moved to a "topic board". Similar topics were merged to give wider scope for discussions, voted on https://twitter.com/skrb/status/998008300825231362  , and in a kind-of Just In Time manner, the most popular were scheduled into the next few sessions. I don't think anything was planned more than 3 hours in advance. Typically there was a technical talk and a non-techical talk running at once but I don't think this was a rule.

Each session was run by the attendees. A few were lecture-style with experts taking questions and giving explanations, but most were free-form discussion which worked well given our small numbers. There was a moderator and a secretary for each session but moderation was very light and anyone could help out. Also there was a strict rule that "whoever is in the room is the right group", so it was possible (and encouraged) to leave or join a session halfway trhough.


# ...in a Japanese Onsen

An onsen is a traditional style of Japanese hot-spring baths, which typically provides food and sleeping rooms (a kind of hotel, I suppose). The hot springs are large single-sex baths for up to about 30 people at once. People get cleaned in a shower room then go in naked, balancing a towel on their head like Duke. The water in this onsen wasn't too hot, around 42 degrees, and there was an open-air bath and a cold-water pluge too for the brave.  As the water is fed from natural hot springs, it is typical for onsen to be based in mountainous/volcanic areas, and Hakone is such an area.

Onsen food is normally pretty fancy. We had [Koseki Ryori](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kaiseki) which is traditional meal of about 10 courses selected carefully for flavour and balance.

As for sleeping, we slept in small rooms for 3 or 4 people. The "beds" are no more than unrolled mats on the floor and are cleared away during the daytime. One of the bedrooms doubled as the second conference room.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Discussion in small room <a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/JOnsen?src=hash&amp;ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#JOnsen</a> <a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/JOnsenUnconf?src=hash&amp;ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#JOnsenUnconf</a> <a href="https://t.co/9BYhBMX4M4">pic.twitter.com/9BYhBMX4M4</a></p>&mdash; Yuichi Sakuraba (@skrb) <a href="https://twitter.com/skrb/status/997669666762850304?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">May 19, 2018</a></blockquote>
<script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

In an onsen it is normal to wear Yukata - a kind of robe - or regular clothes, and JOnsen attendees wore either according to their own comfort. This is a yukata: https://twitter.com/skrb/status/997792671178547200

Hakone is around 2 hours drive from Tokyo, but feels a world away as it is so relaxed and surrounded by beautiful nature.  I felt that the quiet atmosphere of the Onsen and the fact that all JOnsen attendees ate and relaxed together made the conference much better. I have made 30 new friends as well as learned so much about everythgn we discussed.


# People and Language

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Thanks to all the attendees of <a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/jonsenunconf?src=hash&amp;ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#jonsenunconf</a>! We had a wonderful time at the most relaxed <a href="https://twitter.com/java?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@Java</a> unconference :) <a href="https://t.co/n8wiJYvcwc">pic.twitter.com/n8wiJYvcwc</a></p>&mdash; JOnsen (@JOnsenUnconf) <a href="https://twitter.com/JOnsenUnconf/status/998730461982568450?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">May 22, 2018</a></blockquote>
<script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>


There were aroudn 30 people at JOnsen. Several Java Champions and active members of the international Java community, as well as many people who are newer to it. Around half were Japanese, with the remaining people being from all over: UK, Mexico, Poland, US, Canada, Austria, Sweden were all represented.

With so many people from various places, the unofficial defacto language of JOnsen was English. The use of English in the software industry was a topic that came up for discussion a few times. It seems that the vast majority of the tech industry uses English so it is advantageous to at least be able to read it well. Some Japanese attendees translate technical articles into Japanese but they felt it would be better for Japanese programmers to understand english better.

In fact, I only counted 5 people who are native English speakers, but all the group conversations were in English. In that sense, English can be thought of as a "glue language". I think this is reflected in English usage globally - according to wikipedia native speakers only account for ~25% of English-speakers worldwide.

English natives should be aware of this, because it's _on us_ to help others. I acknowledge fully my privilege here. Native speakers can use a lot of idioms and sarcasm, which is often hard to understand. While speaking: slow down and simplify. While listening: repeat and suggest alternative words/grammar. I would like to repeat [my offer to help anyone who is submitting to conferences, blogging or writing technical articles](https://twitter.com/MaximumGilliard/status/998028457660600320).

# Sessions

The sessions ran two at a time. There was often a choice of technical or non-technical session, but this wasn't really a rule. Topics included: unserstanding the new JDK release cadence, using English vs local languages in software, writing good conference abstracts, understanding Graal, fostering diversity in communities, balancing work/free time/OSS contribution, using drones as IOT devices, relating functional programming to performance tuning, educating children, and many many more. I noticed that several meta-topics came up repeatedly - eg education, language, work/life balance.

Each session had one or several moderators, whose job was to keep the converstaion flowing but avoid any one speaker or topic from dominating. The most successful moderators made sure everyone who wanted to speak was able to. As I was fascinated and absorbed by most of the discussion I made very few notes. I think each session had a dedicated secretary but I haven't seen any notes online yet.

# Activities
 
In keeping with the relaxed theme of the unconference, one of the sessions was an activity outside the Onsen. These were decided in the now familiar way of suggestions and votes. There was a trip to a local geothermal site called Owakudani, a cable-car ride to the top of Mt Hakone, a walk/swim in the nearby lake Ashi-ko, and a motorcycle jaunt along the Hakone Skyline road. Because of the excellent weather (on the second day at least) and Hakone's location, we were able to get excellent views of Mt Fuji.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">What a difference a day makes <a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/JOnsenUnconf?src=hash&amp;ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#JOnsenUnconf</a> <a href="https://t.co/AqDfnEPs45">pic.twitter.com/AqDfnEPs45</a></p>&mdash; Mikael Vidstedt (@MikaelVidstedt) <a href="https://twitter.com/MikaelVidstedt/status/997667572978827266?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">May 19, 2018</a></blockquote>
<script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

The activities really helped cement the friendships we made as well as give some time outside the onsen. Of course many of the interesting technical and social discussions were continued during the activities. Naturally there was karaoke in the evening too

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Karaoke time!!! <a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/JOnsen?src=hash&amp;ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#JOnsen</a> <a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/jonsenunconf?src=hash&amp;ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#jonsenunconf</a> <a href="https://t.co/1epVCEMfSw">pic.twitter.com/1epVCEMfSw</a></p>&mdash; Yuichi Sakuraba (@skrb) <a href="https://twitter.com/skrb/status/997816498352570368?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">May 19, 2018</a></blockquote>
<script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>


# Summary

The unconference format is very interesting - it worked very well for us. But it poses a few challenges to organizers: Although the hassle of CfP and scheduling is much less, there is more emphasis on selecting attendees. Variety is important, of background, knowledge-level skills etc. It's useful to have people who are authorities in their area, and people who are familiar with unconference formats.

I was happy to learn so much about the Japanese software development industry - to see that the challenges they face are similar and different to ours - and to hear some interesting things from experts. I'm very grateful to have been invited and hopeful that I will be invited back to JOnsen.

On leaving we were given 3 challenges:

- Submit to an international conference
- Invite 2 others to an unconference
- Share what you have learned

I gave myself the 4th challenge, to seriously consider organising an unconference in my home city of Bristol, UK, so watch out for that!
