# Bristol Cloud Native Unconference

## Bristol Cloud Native Unconference

We are delighted to be hosting the first Bristol Cloud Native Unconference on *November 23rd 2018*.

The unconference is for people who work with cloud technology in any role and with any level of experience to come together for a day full of discussions and learning with their peers.

If you are interested in things like *serverless*, *CI/CD*, *Kubernetes*, *cloud security*, *microservices*, *containers*, *Anything-as-a-Service*, *public or private clouds* - then this event is for you.

### What is an "Unconference"?

The unconference format does not follow usual conference norms. All the scheduled slots start out empty and *you* decide what to talk about. No separation is made between "speakers" and "audience" - everyone is encouraged to use their unique set of skills and experience to participate equally.

The schedule is generated by suggestions from participants. Topics are voted on, and the most popular are added to the schedule. You are encouraged to propose sessions about anything, wherever you place yourself on the journey from beginner to expert.

When you propose a session, you are *not* expected to stand up and talk to a crowd. You do not need slides or presentation materials. People choose to attend your session out of their own interest in it. You might want to start the discussion by explaining why you are interested in it and by asking others the same question - the rest is up to everyone there.

### The Event

Because the unconference format is designed to start, encourage and facilitate conversations Bristol Cloud Native Unconference will be held in the wonderful event space of the [M-Shed](http://www.bristolmuseums.org.uk/m-shed/) and participants will have full access to the museum for the day.

If you want to talk chaos monkeys in the Wildlife Photographer of the Year exhibition, it's in the next room. If you want to talk about how you ship your containers in view of the old loading dock of Bristol Harbourside, it's just over the balcony. 

The conference is _free_ to attend. We ask that if you are able to you donate an amount to a tech-related charity of your choice as part of your registration. We have some suggestions on our [charities page](TODO:link). We also ask you to register [here](TODO:link), and if you change your mind then please remember to unregister. Once you have registered we encourage you to start talking to other attendees on our [unconference slack](TODO).

## The Unconference

Unconferences are derived from the [Open Space format](http://openspaceworld.org/wp2/explore/open-space-elevator-speeches/), and we follow their principles:

Whoever comes are the right people
: We don't need CEOs and world-leaders to get something done - just some people who care.

Whenever it starts is the right time
: We have a schedule but fascinating conversations can and should be spontaneous. Don't let the clock be your boss.

Whatever happens is the only thing that could have
: Once something has happened it is done. And anything not done does not happen. If you wish to see something happen, then do it.

Wherever it happens is the right place
: Spaces are open everywhere, all the time.

When it is over, it is over
: We never know how long it will take. When the conversation is finished then move on to the next thing.

### The Law of Two Feet

> If you find yourselve in any situation where you are neither learning nor contributing: use your two feet and go someplace else.

Don't waste your time. Move around, cross-pollinate groups and be open to chance encounters. The unconference is there to serve *you* and it is *you* who has the ability to make it the event you want - and we will do everything we can to support you.

## The Event

### Before the Day

Once you have [registered](registrations-page) you will be invited to join the Bristol Cloud Native Slack instance where you can introduce yourself to other attendees, talk about whatever interests you, share travel plans etc. The social side of the unconference starts right away!

### On the Day

The M-Shed will be open from 9. We will start from 9.30 and sessions will start from 10.15.

You can expect a decent break for lunch, then sessions will run until 4.15. We will have a retrospective and close out at 5.

After the event there will be a social event (TBC, we are currently hoping to organise a boat tour of the Bristol Harbourside) and space will be reserved at [Wild Beer at Wapping Wharf](http://www.wbwappingwharf.com/) for those who want to stay later for food and drink.

### After the Day

You are encouraged to stay in touch with each other after the event. The unconference Slack will still be active and there will be details available at the unconference of other local meetups as well as further talks and hands-on labs.

### Food and Drink

TODO: Find something to copy based on what the M-Shed have said about their food.

## Charities

Attendance at Bristol Cloud Native Unconference is free, however we would like you to consider making a donation to a tech-related charity as part of your registration, if you are able. You are free to choose a charity - if you need help, here are some of our favourites:

- [Software Freedom Conservancy](https://sfconservancy.org)
- [Women Who Code](https://www.womenwhocode.com/)
- [One Laptop Per Child](http://one.laptop.org/)
- [Wikipedia.org](https://www.wikipedia.org/)
- [Techmums](https://techmums.co/)
- [Bletchley Park](https://www.bletchleypark.org.uk/)

## Registration

TODO: Sort out how to manage registrations. Can we use eventbrite?

I would like to ask:

 - Name
 - Email
 - Twitter (can we make this public?)
 - Are you from Bristol Y/N
 - Food/Drink restrictions?
 - The unconference format relies on session topics being suggested by attendees. What topics would you like to see discussed? Seen something brilliant recently? Something confusing you? What can you share your in-depth knowlege about? [Will be shared with other attendees]
 - Do you consider yourself to be part of any under-represented group in technology? (If you are not sure what this means or why it is important please read [this](TODO:link))[Optional, will not be shared with other attendees]
 - Which charity did you donate to as part of this registration? [Optional, will not be shared with other attendees]

## Code of Conduct

All attendees, speakers, sponsors and volunteers at our conference are required to agree with the following code of conduct. Organizers will enforce this code throughout the event. We are expecting cooperation from all participants to help ensuring a safe environment for everybody.

### The Quick Version

Bristol Cloud Native Unconference is dedicated to providing a harassment-free conference experience for everyone, regardless of gender, gender identity and expression, age, sexual orientation, disability, physical appearance, body size, race, ethnicity, religion (or lack thereof), or technology choices. We do not tolerate harassment of conference participants in any form. Sexual language and imagery is not appropriate for any conference venue, including talks, workshops, parties, Twitter and other online media. Conference participants violating these rules may be sanctioned or expelled from the conference at the discretion of the conference organizers.

### The Less Quick Version

Harassment includes offensive verbal comments related to gender, gender identity and expression, age, sexual orientation, disability, physical appearance, body size, race, ethnicity, religion, technology choices, sexual images in public spaces, deliberate intimidation, stalking, following, harassing photography or recording, sustained disruption of talks or other events, inappropriate physical contact, and unwelcome sexual attention.

Participants asked to stop any harassing behavior are expected to comply immediately.

If a participant engages in harassing behavior, the unconference organizers may take any action they deem appropriate, including warning the offender or expulsion from the unconference.

If you are being harassed, notice that someone else is being harassed, or have any other concerns, please contact a member of conference staff immediately. Unconference staff can be identified TODO: How?!

Unconference staff will be happy to help participants contact hotel/venue security or local law enforcement, provide escorts, or otherwise assist those experiencing harassment to feel safe for the duration of the conference. We value your attendance.

We expect participants to follow these rules at the unconference venue and unconference-related social events.

## Contacts

Organisers:
Matthew Gilliard 
Maddie Patrichi
(TODO: Photos, twitter, email)

## Sponsors

Oracle
TODO: more
